David Schaich (he): All right, according to my clock it's time to get going.  I see a bunch of folks connected remotely as well as those in the room.
David Schaich (he): We are back after the break, and in focus,
David Schaich (he): on the seventeenth of April, for which the magic number today is
David Schaich (he): 4, 9, 7, 4, 7, 2.
David Schaich (he): And before we get back underway with the final third of the module, I'll check to see if there are any
David Schaich (he): questions that have accumulated over the break in the past few weeks.
David Schaich (he): While you continue thinking about that, we'll do just
David Schaich (he): first a few logistical notes: that you may well have seen that the
David Schaich (he): last homework assignment is up on Canvas and due in
David Schaich (he): about 2 weeks on
David Schaich (he): Wednesday, the third of May, rather than the usual Tuesday, thanks to the bank holiday that week.  And then, a few weeks after that,
David Schaich (he): our exam has been scheduled for the afternoon
of Friday
David Schaich (he): the 26th
David Schaich (he): of March --- or of May.
David Schaich (he): We've jumped a few weeks ahead, making it May rather than March. And since we have jumped a few weeks ahead, it's worthwhile just to
David Schaich (he): remind ourselves of
David Schaich (he): big picture of this module what we've been doing
David Schaich (he): before the break, and what we still have left to do.
David Schaich (he): We started off by finding so much all the way
David Schaich (he): sets of events which are themselves
David Schaich (he): sets of outcomes of possible experiments.
David Schaich (he): to each of which is associated with the
focus.
David Schaich (he): the specific
David Schaich (he): variety of the statistical ensembles.
David Schaich (he): We are.
David Schaich (he): The events that we have are some collection of degrees of freedom and particles that
David Schaich (he): Canada take up any one of the
David Schaich (he): by number, possibly infinite possibilities for how they are distributed in terms of position, momentum, energy, and so forth, subject to certain physical constraints.
David Schaich (he): zoom out just a bit more. Oh. have the comparison of the 3 years statistical ensemble we've
David Schaich (he): focus on in this module which differ by the constraints that they oppose. First, the micro canonical ensemble very directly imposes conservation of energy.
David Schaich (he): I'll call first of all thermodynamics
requiring that.
David Schaich (he): but the number of particles in the system, and the total energy of all those particles is fixed
David Schaich (he): as they all the time. It probably this requires that
David Schaich (he): the system be completely isolated from the rest of the universe, so that no particle for energy.
the exchange for anyone say, trying to
David Schaich (he): observe the system that makes it
David Schaich (he): a bit awkward to talk about the context of physics where you like to look at the things we're talking about.
David Schaich (he): and this makes the canonical ensemble some of more useful. We are.
David Schaich (he): The conservation of energy is the lax, and turned into the overall conservation of energy for the system, as well as its surroundings
David Schaich (he): and heat exchange at soft energy between system and surroundings is allowed.
David Schaich (he): Are we
David Schaich (he): demand that the surroundings are sufficiently large, that they fix
David Schaich (he): the temperature
David Schaich (he): of the system to be
David Schaich (he): some constant value, even as the system evolves, and soft energy with the surroundings. What the number of particles is still fixed.
David Schaich (he): and finally going to be. we can see before the brief. We generalize this further. It's the Grand canonical ensemble
David Schaich (he): where we play that same sort of
David Schaich (he): trick. and have now both
David Schaich (he): particle and heat being exchanged with a
David Schaich (he): large external particle reservoir that fixes the chemical potential new as well as the temperature of the system. even though the number of particles.
David Schaich (he): energy of those particles.
David Schaich (he): and very to exchange with the surroundings.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): look at
David Schaich (he): micro canonical ensemble. Relatively, briefly.
David Schaich (he): applications to your gases
David Schaich (he): and thermodynamic cycles.
David Schaich (he): We will focus for next week or 2
David Schaich (he): the grand canonical case. and in particular
David Schaich (he): it there.
David Schaich (he): Our next the topic will be.
David Schaich (he): and for this week, and possibly next week, as well as going to be
David Schaich (he): applications of that.
David Schaich (he): looking specifically at something at
David Schaich (he): new compared to the ideal gases of a dynamic cycles that we've already dealt with.
David Schaich (he): Considering. Yeah. right quantum gases where the quantum here just means that these gases, the particles within them, and their statistics are covered by
David Schaich (he): the use of what's the mechanics that we have
David Schaich (he): introduced and derived just in the
David Schaich (he): last week before the term break.
David Schaich (he): So it's a reminder of this
David Schaich (he): quantum. Statistics are distinguished from classical statistics by the way in which
David Schaich (he): we define micro states.
David Schaich (he): Yes. heavy
David Schaich (he): probability of being adopted through the framework of this ensembles as capability spaces.
David Schaich (he): In the classical case
David Schaich (he): these microstates are defined by determining the partition function for a single particle.
David Schaich (he): replicating that for all of the end particles in the system. this needs to
David Schaich (he): some pathologies and certain machines where the effects of
become significant.
David Schaich (he): So we introduced
David Schaich (he): the alternative quantum approach. We're. Instead of looking at all of the
David Schaich (he): possible states of a single particle, with any value of single particle energy.
David Schaich (he): We, instead look at
David Schaich (he): energy levels of the system
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): consider all the possible. We, as the particles can occupy those energy levels to specify about.
David Schaich (he): There you are
David Schaich (he): occupation numbers, where there are 2 main classes of on some statistics.
David Schaich (he): one related to those that are characterized by these occupation numbers, and so for energy level.
David Schaich (he): showing through
David Schaich (he): the calculation of the grand canonical partition function. In this case this is what's called those Einstein statistics. so that our economical petition function.
David Schaich (he): starting point, from which we can derive all the quantities of interest for the system it's. The project product over all the energy levels
David Schaich (he): of a factor, one
David Schaich (he): over one minus the exponential, the inverse temperature, the negative sign times, the difference between the
David Schaich (he): energy corresponding to that energy level and the chemical potential we heard. This
David Schaich (he): arises from a geometric series that only converges if that chemical potential is less than all of the
David Schaich (he): energies for each energy level
David Schaich (he): and the other
David Schaich (he): other alternative, at least in that
David Schaich (he): more than 2 spatial dimensions it's. The only alternative is to have particles new as fermions that are characterized by occupation numbers.
David Schaich (he): the only possibilities being 0 or one an empty level or a field level.
David Schaich (he): And the same calculation with energy levels restricted to 2.
David Schaich (he): Those 2 possibilities for fermions. You'll see if you can be direct for an economical partition function which
David Schaich (he): differs. One of those I assign that economical partition function by certain negative signs. First of all, you
David Schaich (he): the 2 terms that are multiplied together for each energy level are
David Schaich (he): the numerator rather than the nominator, and consider that a different sign of how they are raised to.
David Schaich (he): And then the relative negative sign. we, even the one that comes from the unoccupied levels.
the exponential factor that comes from the occupied levels.
David Schaich (he): And since there's no concerned about convergence of the geometric series here, there's no constraint on
David Schaich (he): relative size, the chemical potential
David Schaich (he): compared to any of those energies.
David Schaich (he): And in well, both of these cases there is a classical limit.
David Schaich (he): We're
David Schaich (he): the the po sign sign that
David Schaich (he): statistics, and from the direct statistics converge to what we would get from a classical calculation
David Schaich (he): given the same energy levels, but analyzing them. based on single particle partition functions that gives us what's called the an actual postman
David Schaich (he): statistics, and
David Schaich (he): all 3 of those
David Schaich (he): sets of statistics, the 2 quantum ones, and the classical statistics all agree with each other, and the high temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): So long as
David Schaich (he): the chemical potential
David Schaich (he): is a large
David Schaich (he): negative number.
David Schaich (he): specifically negative chemical potential. this to be much greater than the temperature, which itself is much greater than I do you energies for the energy levels.
David Schaich (he): So that's the
David Schaich (he): grand review of what we've done so far in this module with some extra focus on
David Schaich (he): topic that we will he
David Schaich (he): building on today? I'll pause.
David Schaich (he): I have to make sure that everyone is
David Schaich (he): happy with where we are. and how we got here.
David Schaich (he): Not hearing any objections. we can move on to
David Schaich (he): building up the
David Schaich (he): grand canonical analysis of pump and gases based on these pre economical partition functions.
David Schaich (he): There are
David Schaich (he): one main missing piece in the expressions here which will vary from a system system, and to find what we actually me when we look into
David Schaich (he): a physics analysis. choose what are the energy levels
David Schaich (he): so L
David Schaich (he): that get inserted into these current economical partition functions
David Schaich (he): from which we derive all of you interesting aspects of our statistical system.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): if we consider briefly
so.
David Schaich (he): the energy levels the corresponding values of the energy for them.
David Schaich (he): i'm not sure
David Schaich (he): which previous modules all of you have
David Schaich (he): taken in in years past, you know, taking different sets.
David Schaich (he): So, at the risk of boarding you with a general review. We think about a single particle and relativistic mechanics.
David Schaich (he): It's energy. It's given by
David Schaich (he): the combination of mass, energy, and kinetic energy
David Schaich (he): we are.
David Schaich (he): See, here is
David Schaich (he): the speed of light.
David Schaich (he): It's really just you the conversion factor that we could
David Schaich (he): set to one by working with appropriate sets of units. We've been in expressions for the sake of familiarity. Like the result, the equals Mc squared
David Schaich (he): or the mass under sheet.
David Schaich (he): This relation between the square energy, a single particle.
David Schaich (he): and it's mass, and the
David Schaich (he): where It's P. Square is
David Schaich (he): the usual under products for all 3 components couple of months under the Xy and Z directions is our relations. Sometimes no one is. My son is trying to.
David Schaich (he): and C squared on one side of the right. you see on the other side.
David Schaich (he): energy on that hypotenuse. It's square. It's just some of the squares, the other 2 size.
David Schaich (he): And then, considering the energies to
David Schaich (he): put into the
David Schaich (he): correct knowledge of partition function. it will generally
David Schaich (he): ignore that mass energy because it is
David Schaich (he): fixed for
David Schaich (he): given particle mass and focus instead
David Schaich (he): on the kinetic energy that varies with the
David Schaich (he): momentum of that particle. We briefly look forward to
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): 2 general limits of this. that we have
David Schaich (he): a massless particle, or we're generally situation. It's much larger than it's mass times at speed of light and a conversion factor.
David Schaich (he): We have the we call for relativistic
David Schaich (he): energy, momentum relation. The energy is just
David Schaich (he): momentum. inner product times the speed of light.
David Schaich (he): and then the other extreme.
David Schaich (he): so called, non relativistic limits.
David Schaich (he): The momentum
David Schaich (he): it's much larger than the mass times the speed of light
David Schaich (he): you should get back to.
David Schaich (he): and we hope to get back to the more familiar P. Squared over
David Schaich (he): to M. That we worked with in the context of classical, not an optimistic ideal. Yes, several years ago.
David Schaich (he): Take the square root of both sides of this expression and pull out an overall factor of Mc squared.
David Schaich (he): We have
David Schaich (he): under the square root, then is one over
David Schaich (he): one plus PC. Squared over and C squared is square.
David Schaich (he): and in this limit that the I mentioned it's very small compared to the mass energy.
David Schaich (he): and this is
David Schaich (he): a small factor being added to one which we can expand.
David Schaich (he): usual.
plus
David Schaich (he): e squared 2 factors of the
M squared
David Schaich (he): C squared
David Schaich (he): you next factor of P. Over
with the fourth, and distributing that
David Schaich (he): Mc. Squared. This gives us the cost of mass energy that we can
David Schaich (he): plus the
David Schaich (he): p squared over 2 M. That we want to figure out is the more familiar non-relativistic kinetic energy
the corrections
David Schaich (he): before
David Schaich (he): and C squared. Yeah, we can ignore.
David Schaich (he): So because yes. fixed mass energy is.
David Schaich (he): they're relevant. You've already seen in the context of the classical canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): We dealt with ideal gases a few years ago
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): it's not realistic minutes.
The usual
David Schaich (he): e squared over 2 N. Or the energy.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): in the context of awesome statistics we will repeat our earlier regularization. he's continuously, very energy and momentum.
David Schaich (he): You recall the least a message to a certain set up to
David Schaich (he): so units up there. The L.
David Schaich (he): Comes from the
David Schaich (he): steps to the volume
David Schaich (he): V equals L. Cube. within which our article is located.
David Schaich (he): You see a set of now you
David Schaich (he): that determined the possible values of the momentum.
David Schaich (he): And as we talked about this at the very end of the lecture before the term break
David Schaich (he): in the context, sorry
David Schaich (he): autumn statistics, we have
David Schaich (he): the possible values of
this is
David Schaich (he): this: is your case no longer include 0. They have to be strictly positive numbers. 50 positive integers.
David Schaich (he): and and go up arbitrarily high. This is
David Schaich (he): we discussed you, too. Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation.
David Schaich (he): This change from allowing it to be 0 in the classical case to require it. No one's here. Okay automatically alters the
David Schaich (he): gravity energy of the system as well as the multiplicity of the excited states that we have. We will.
David Schaich (he): We call them the degeneracies. So we call that if we have multiple distinct energy levels with the same value of the energy, those are known as degenerate energy levels.
David Schaich (he): and they all have to be
David Schaich (he): taken into account in
David Schaich (he): expressions for the grand Canonical partition function. Yes. is our starting point. And just for illustration
David Schaich (he): often ground state with this new restriction that the K's. Have to be at least one
David Schaich (he): corresponds to a minimum.
David Schaich (he): One units of momentum. That you should be
David Schaich (he): 3 directions should be
David Schaich (he): what that into this non optimistic energy. Pretty good.
David Schaich (he): The energy is 3 times
David Schaich (he): that overall
David Schaich (he): 5 square over 2 and L squared. I should. I've mentioned that that H. Bar is
David Schaich (he): the point, Constants, that we saw before
David Schaich (he): again the conversion factor that we
David Schaich (he): could set to one by working with appropriate units. But
David Schaich (he): you will keep around just to make things look more familiar, and make it easier to keep track of what to what quantities have, what units
David Schaich (he): we look similarly at the
David Schaich (he): so called, excited States with larger values of this energy. Do you next one that we have, after the
David Schaich (he): 2 years of energy in one of the 3 directions
David Schaich (he): which one does it matter? But
David Schaich (he): since each of these components gets squared
David Schaich (he): no relativistically, we have 4 plus one plus one
David Schaich (he): for 6 min of energy. In that case
David Schaich (he): you can have
David Schaich (he): so 2, 2, one
David Schaich (he): excuse. 4, 8, and 9,
David Schaich (he): 252 would give
David Schaich (he): 3 times 4 is 12, which is actually
David Schaich (he): a higher energy state than half for you
David Schaich (he): 1 one. So 3, this of energy giving or bringing this to momentum, getting it
David Schaich (he): after 9 on the energy last morning that one
David Schaich (he): stop here. It's easy not to
David Schaich (he): you filling in this list of all of the excited state energies.
David Schaich (he): real points out of that.
David Schaich (he): Each of these 3 values of the energy
David Schaich (he): correspond to
David Schaich (he): 3 possible momentum vectors.
David Schaich (he): On the first case 2 1 1 1 2, one and 1 1 2 3 possible ways
David Schaich (he): distributed. That was
David Schaich (he): different choices of a's and the 3
David Schaich (he): directions. So each of those energies correspond to
David Schaich (he): 3 degenerate energy levels.
David Schaich (he): where, as the ground state. and this other
David Schaich (he): energy level with 2 units of momentum, and each of the 3 directions are the samely degenerate.
David Schaich (he): So that is a general review of the you
David Schaich (he): limits of energies that we can have to insert into all right partition function over
David Schaich (he): questions about those possibilities before we go on to choose one and charge ahead with
David Schaich (he): computing some physical qualities.
David Schaich (he): Let's start with a
David Schaich (he): 1 1 2, one. consider something different indeed. ideal gas. We look tips
David Schaich (he): and the non volume to stick limits classically several weeks ago.
David Schaich (he): we will consider. possibly for the rest of the day.
David Schaich (he): a guess of
David Schaich (he): Yes. these are
David Schaich (he): those on the particles of light
David Schaich (he): and the photon energy given by that exact. Now we're all to the 6 min. the energy of the photon. Is it so that sometimes you see the flight.
David Schaich (he): the momentum
David Schaich (he): in our usual
David Schaich (he): following
David Schaich (he): we have H. Bar comes that factor of C, A single factor of Pi over L
again.
David Schaich (he): K. The square root of the inner product of Kx, Ky. K. Z. That 3 components. It's a jury momentum. Vector
David Schaich (he): You may
David Schaich (he): have heard inform you that
David Schaich (he): photons I've mentioned. They are particles of light.
David Schaich (he): Light itself is an electromagnetic wave.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): they are
David Schaich (he): of those.
please.
David Schaich (he): which suggests that we should be able to analyze their
David Schaich (he): energies of momenta in terms of
David Schaich (he): properties of the slaves. Specifically. in my wavelength and frequency.
David Schaich (he): All right. The speed of those ways. It's the speed of light. Yeah, see. is the product
that we can see.
David Schaich (he): So the way is.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): this Omega. it's not to be confused with
David Schaich (he): our labels for individual microstates.
David Schaich (he): Steven.
David Schaich (he): and the frequency of these waves given by 2 pi times the radial frequency in terms of Hertz. So you know cyclic frequency. So it's, counting the number of radians.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, it's it's traveled
David Schaich (he): in a given amount of time as opposed to the number of cycles around that
too high.
David Schaich (he): and i'll put up here.
David Schaich (he): clarify some of these quantities if they are not familiar. Just a second. Make the point before I do so. That
David Schaich (he): imposing
David Schaich (he): in which our photon gas is sitting this
David Schaich (he): the momentum of those flights. But equivalently you
David Schaich (he): frequency. and
David Schaich (he): through this connection to the speed of light.
David Schaich (he): So I zoom out
David Schaich (he): enough to fit this diagram into the screen.
David Schaich (he): Looking at just one direction of alright, how are you? We have a factor of 3 spatial directions.
David Schaich (he): If we want to consistently have a wave
David Schaich (he): that is standing inside of this volume.
David Schaich (he): They're all restrictions on
yeah
David Schaich (he): possible wavelengths
David Schaich (he): that it can have. So we, we.
David Schaich (he): I will remind you, is the point at which
David Schaich (he): distance it takes for a way to start repeating It's
David Schaich (he): oscillation.
David Schaich (he): So this way
David Schaich (he): as we go in space
David Schaich (he): it was up and down it was up again.
David Schaich (he): So do you. What are you flying?
David Schaich (he): Here is the distance it takes to go that whole cycle and get back to
David Schaich (he): that's starting point.
David Schaich (he): So that is a full wavelength L 2 which
David Schaich (he): you cancel out the tues. There is just L
David Schaich (he): down here at the longest possible wavelength that you can have in this direction
David Schaich (he): with like L. We go over only half of the cycle. So this is
David Schaich (he): one over 2. It is cool that it's identified with the same relation that we have off to the side. And then all integer multiples of
Hey you!
David Schaich (he): What you find over to has to be equal to outward.
So it's a
David Schaich (he): mathematical terms.
David Schaich (he): We save that K.
David Schaich (he): In this direction.
David Schaich (he): Call that direction X. It's just one direction
David Schaich (he): has to be equal to
David Schaich (he): the length album divided by the wavelength half the way of life. Land over to we can rearrange
David Schaich (he): to say that the
David Schaich (he): only allow the wavelengths are
David Schaich (he): 2 L. Over that corresponding integer starting from
David Schaich (he): from there. So we producing the 3 cases illustrated here.
David Schaich (he): Now the corresponding frequencies that we have given that substitute quantize wavelength
David Schaich (he): all right by it the speed of light. So the frequency in terms of
David Schaich (he): 2 pi times the speed of light over Lambda
David Schaich (he): much plugging in. There is 2 l over that. Hey? X. We have a after C left over this huge cancel. There's a.
David Schaich (he): and there you go. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Positive integer case of X,
David Schaich (he): which we can recognize as just
David Schaich (he): a constant factor times the moment that we have
David Schaich (he): in that one direction. So we have a C. Second H. Bar
David Schaich (he): that piece of X.
David Schaich (he): And if we rearrange this expression, then we have
David Schaich (he): P. Times, C. Is H. Bar times omega Times, c. Of course, is
David Schaich (he): that's goes on energy
David Schaich (he): express that completely in terms of the frequency
David Schaich (he): of the photon, treating it as
David Schaich (he): a
David Schaich (he): and precisely quote ones to.
David Schaich (he): So that is actually a result that we
David Schaich (he): derived just before the break quickly and not quite so carefully. No seeing it again
more
David Schaich (he): through a derivation. And this is an illustration of this relation between
David Schaich (he): energy
David Schaich (he): with that Briefly. before the break
David Schaich (he): here. This weekly line up here is sketching out the
David Schaich (he): the wave length of the course, all in 2
David Schaich (he): various distance, frequency, or energy scales.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): when the wavelength is long, there is a large distance before
David Schaich (he): that way, it begins
so
David Schaich (he): kilometers or millimeters
to microwave
David Schaich (he): that corresponds to a it's your express in terms of hert or cycles per second. In this case. however, it's corresponding to
David Schaich (he): kilometer wavelengths.
David Schaich (he): and energies that correspond to
David Schaich (he): fairly low temperatures of the radio signal, much less than
David Schaich (he): a single Kelvin. A nice 272
David Schaich (he): we centigrade
David Schaich (he): I would use
David Schaich (he): to be more relevant to us in our day to day? Or is the spectrum of visible light that corresponds to
David Schaich (he): wavelengths of several 100 nanometers? So some fraction of
David Schaich (he): it might come here.
David Schaich (he): This is the relatively small. I said, the All to
David Schaich (he): process as colors ranging from red. Yes. low frequencies up to blue and violence at high frequencies.
David Schaich (he): If you go slightly more. then the bread frequency that's referred to as infrared, which corresponds to
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): lower frequencies and over energies, and all the temperatures I will be referring to, infrared as
David Schaich (he): lower energies in general, not restricted to
David Schaich (he): this specific range of microwave and similarly ultraviolet. high energies. short made lines or high frequencies.
David Schaich (he): as well as high energies and
David Schaich (he): high temperatures. So that
David Schaich (he): is a bit of visualization that we could have for
David Schaich (he): what these frequencies and what you want to respond to, as well as that terminology, you know.
David Schaich (he): infrared referring to low energies. ultraviolet referring to bye.
David Schaich (he): we have some time left before the very close to check. If there are questions about
David Schaich (he): this connection between
David Schaich (he): momenta frequency and wavelength for photons.
David Schaich (he): and if they are not to start setting up the
David Schaich (he): calculation throw dynamics and equation of states of the photon gas.
David Schaich (he): So we mentioned that photons are bosons.
David Schaich (he): So what could be
David Schaich (he): pre-economical potential that
David Schaich (he): to consider for them, and into which we
David Schaich (he): inserts
expression for
David Schaich (he): the energies of photons. even discreet quantized energy levels. Okay.
David Schaich (he): what kind of energy is H. Bar Omega?
David Schaich (he): We need to take the what
David Schaich (he): of the bose-einstein
David Schaich (he): partition function in order to get this photon
David Schaich (he): potential
David Schaich (he): that comes with overall factor of minus temperature?
David Schaich (he): And we actually did this calculation before the break.
David Schaich (he): If we do it without much trouble by taking the long of the product
David Schaich (he): of those energy levels, just gets the sum
David Schaich (he): over the board.
David Schaich (he): dispose on a side that
sure
David Schaich (he): what am I? This e. To the minus beta, increase temperature times that minus the chemical potential
David Schaich (he): which we can convert into a sum over all of the
David Schaich (he): 3 vectors. K. That we have for a given.
David Schaich (he): We are in this. You can plug in H bar and negative.
David Schaich (he): or the photon energy, keeping in mind that it possible that they are going to be some function.
David Schaich (he): Oh.
David Schaich (he): these
David Schaich (he): momentum vectors or wave vectors. K.
David Schaich (he): There's a fact with 2 here, my inserted just to in agreements with nature. This has to do with
interesting
David Schaich (he): back to that. i'll tell you, for now
David Schaich (he): you know, followers
David Schaich (he): desire. We can look at it in more detail in
David Schaich (he): every so time, even with a given
David Schaich (he): momentum, has 2
David Schaich (he): possible states. You know this polarizations.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): every single energy level is going to be doubly degenerates
David Schaich (he): due to that quantum polarization.
David Schaich (he): in addition to any other
David Schaich (he): see from permutations of the direction of those moments of in the three-dimensional space. So the ground state
David Schaich (he): definitely degenerate in this case, and then
yes.
David Schaich (he): exciting to see if we look at before we go to 6 times. He generates the combination of permutation and polarization
David Schaich (he): in practice. in our actual calculations. and to simplify
David Schaich (he): those calculations.
David Schaich (he): we can think briefly about the physics that we're going after before starting through the mathematics is required to describe it
David Schaich (he): in particular. The fact that we are talking about photons here which
David Schaich (he): are all around us. They are streaming out of all the lights in this room.
David Schaich (he): being created by that projector
David Schaich (he): screen over there.
David Schaich (he): all with a relatively little
David Schaich (he): energy calls.
David Schaich (he): and at the same time all of those
guys
David Schaich (he): off of the screen, and so on, are being absorbed by our eyes again without not causing it too much increase in the energy that our eyes experience. not being cooked by the life that you see
David Schaich (he): at least the level of light in this room.
David Schaich (he): All of which is
David Schaich (he): what I me when I say that photons are
David Schaich (he): easy to create and absorb
David Schaich (he): in the sense that it takes very little energy
David Schaich (he): to change
David Schaich (he): the phone number by.
David Schaich (he): And if we recall yes. the chemical potential correspond to such a change in energy in response to a change in the photon number we can have a very large
David Schaich (he): changing in with very small change in E.
David Schaich (he): Recall that this change has to be considered in the micro canonical ensemble if they fix entropy that turns out not to affect the conclusion
David Schaich (he): at this chemical potential for a full time. Gas is in general an extremely small number
David Schaich (he): that we can
David Schaich (he): approximate to be 0,
David Schaich (he): which is still consistent with hour
David Schaich (he): requirement for the convergence of both Einstein distribution.
David Schaich (he): Since we're, we've restricted ourselves to positive omega with positive frequencies
David Schaich (he): we can set you to 0
David Schaich (he): and still have it be
David Schaich (he): less than all of those photon energy levels.
David Schaich (he): so that the
David Schaich (he): both Einstein distribution will still emerge.
David Schaich (he): Pick up with the We have written down already
David Schaich (he): a second simplification.
David Schaich (he): You have 5 before it'll just be repeating what we did in classical model. In this context. See that
David Schaich (he): you want to consider volumes that are large compared to the characteristic wavelengths
David Schaich (he): of these photons. That's probably easier for you so happy.
David Schaich (he): or hundreds of nanometers scale, they correspond to visible light. It doesn't take much of a box to
David Schaich (he): very closely spaced set of moment, so allow
David Schaich (he): that we can
David Schaich (he): you to integrate over rather than
David Schaich (he): wrestling with discrete.
David Schaich (he): This is an argument that we
David Schaich (he): went through previously. Some of the later. The points in that closely space
David Schaich (he): moment, so we can approximately some over the very well by integrals
David Schaich (he): economical potential for the
the
David Schaich (he): approximately
David Schaich (he): 2 T times integral Oh.
David Schaich (he): one minus C to H. Bar Mega kind of over
we set to 0.
We integrated over
David Schaich (he): the wave numbers
David Schaich (he): each of the 3 directions.
David Schaich (he): Since we're interested in frequencies that
David Schaich (he): proportional to
David Schaich (he): the square, the inner product of those 3 components of the what you
or proportional to the magnitude of the vector
David Schaich (he): that suggests we will benefit from
David Schaich (he): X. Y. Z. Spherical coordinates
David Schaich (he): when we do, though we want to make sure that we
David Schaich (he): enforce our requirement that all of the K's are
David Schaich (he): strictly positive.
so
David Schaich (he): require a positive. I mean. So
David Schaich (he): in this integral and spherical coordinates you want to integrate over
David Schaich (he): only over a single
David Schaich (he): options in 3 dimensional space so mathematically what this corresponds to? Yes. integrating from 0 to infinity that continuously during
David Schaich (he): Hey X 24.
David Schaich (he): Why?
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): is that
David Schaich (he): you have all possible momenta a possible magnitude for these 3 vectors in spherical coordinates. But the integrations over the angular variables.
David Schaich (he): the only go over it. Your single options time
David Schaich (he): 55, rather than going from
David Schaich (he): 0 to pi and 0, 2 pi. Both of these angular integrals i'm. Restricted by this positivity to
David Schaich (he): running from 0 up to high halves. So that's easy. We're just integrating the 5 by itself. That's a factor of pi haves integral of sine theta
David Schaich (he): negative cosine. It has at 0 we pick up another negative side of cosine. subtracting the cosine of 0 that overall it just gives one.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): we are left
David Schaich (he): with this integral over all 3.
David Schaich (he): Here's what you like, is there? It's breaking down the I have times
David Schaich (he): you need to go over a squared Dk.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): you can now insert this constant proportionality between the frequency. And then
David Schaich (he): we vector
David Schaich (he): Okay, that, says the lens of the cave, is that frequency omega
David Schaich (he): over C times Pi right?
David Schaich (he): Based on the picture of
David Schaich (he): waves being fit into a length. L.
David Schaich (he): So C. Pi over L. It's inverted
David Schaich (he): and clicking that in is
David Schaich (he): your full time, green, economical potential. The 2 over to cancels it out leads higher times T.
David Schaich (he): To go from 0 to infinity.
David Schaich (he): A hat squared well, one minus the exponential
David Schaich (he): factor of Dk. X.
David Schaich (he): So we have
David Schaich (he): a squared and Dk
David Schaich (he): to bring in 3 powers of
David Schaich (he): L. Over C. Pi.
David Schaich (he): Lq. Is the volume.
temperature
David Schaich (he): 3 h of C, and then
David Schaich (he): pi over Pi cubed it's pi squared the denominator
David Schaich (he): integration come out the same. It's just the constant factor of so we have an Omega squared log
minus E to the
David Schaich (he): maybe the beach for Omega over temperature.
David Schaich (he): You, Omega. and that is the
David Schaich (he): grant theological potential for a gaps of photons that
David Schaich (he): after a brief break, we will
David Schaich (he): use to derive energy equation, state
David Schaich (he): things about the any questions about this derivation so far before we break for few minutes up until the until 100'clock.
Yibo Dai: Is that mute? The energy of the
David Schaich (he): pause, the recording, and pick up at the start of the hour.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): go ahead and zoom the recording now and say a couple of questions that arise during
David Schaich (he): that break. The first that i'll deal with
David Schaich (he): because it came in first and hopefully will be quicker to deal with this reminder. What is new.
David Schaich (he): And these expressions, starting from great economical partition that we have, this
David Schaich (he): factor of new is
David Schaich (he): the chemical potential.
the grand canonical
David Schaich (he): ensemble. So going back to
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): illustration that we have comparing the
David Schaich (he): 3. So we're dealing with
David Schaich (he): you that
David Schaich (he): chemical potential that is set
David Schaich (he): bye the particle reservoir. It has the same dimensions as the energy and temperature, so it appears. just as a quantity being subtracted from the energy levels in the brand canonical partition function.
David Schaich (he): So it has the dimensions of energy. But it is not self and energy.
David Schaich (he): It's related to the amount of energy that corresponds to each particle in the gas
David Schaich (he): sometimes called that chemical work
David Schaich (he): that we talked about briefly just before the break.
David Schaich (he): So follow up if confusion about that the other question is going back over the relation between all of the variables that we have introduced.
David Schaich (he): Now that we are looking at
David Schaich (he): these particles as
David Schaich (he): both particles and waves.
David Schaich (he): and in particular, the
David Schaich (he): connection between weight like moment of frequency and the L. That we be using to regulate our system the finite volume of.
David Schaich (he): but into. so that we have the accountable number of microstates and well-defined
David Schaich (he): Oh.
David Schaich (he): partition functions that sum over all of those microstates, all those energy levels
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): back all the way in the sequence unit for the lecture notes. When we first looked at
David Schaich (he): regulating classical
non-relativistic.
David Schaich (he): we introduced the on that
David Schaich (he): of the momenta of each particle in the gas could only take certain integer values
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): the moment so I had to be
David Schaich (he): h bar times this pi over L. Times something to your K.
David Schaich (he): Now, back at that point, when everything was classical.
David Schaich (he): mathematical trick, let us write down
David Schaich (he): accountable number of microstates to some over how you work
David Schaich (he): a non-negative integers in each of the 3 directions, hey X.
David Schaich (he): And it's this connection between
David Schaich (he): particles as concept of ways that justify this mathematical trick
David Schaich (he): a fundamental physical level.
We
David Schaich (he): think about waves in on volume Lq. So in each direction of that point. In this case we call it an X. The requirements that
David Schaich (he): the wave fit evenly in that volume requires that they can only have certain wavelengths. and then fix the course on my frequencies
David Schaich (he): due to the
David Schaich (he): we have relation between the frequency wave life and the speed of that wave. A photon. That's the speed of light
David Schaich (he): that is true. Actually, for any wave. Those of you who have
David Schaich (he): done ways in previous modules. maybe more familiar with this sort of relation to this. What! You're thinking about energies where you like some frequencies, and those you were saying for the first time.
David Schaich (he): I should say that this illustration here is from
David Schaich (he): and Schrodinger's introduction to thermal physics. I just
David Schaich (he): copied it out that textbook and
David Schaich (he): consulting that textbook made.
David Schaich (he): given
David Schaich (he): a useful way of thinking about.
David Schaich (he): If the lecture knows themselves, they'll make it clear.
David Schaich (he): But basically what we are doing is
David Schaich (he): deriving. Probably not. And we're justified
David Schaich (he): physical approach that mathematical trick that we had before that there are
David Schaich (he): to stop. It is your possibilities for
momenta of particles
David Schaich (he): that in this case is resulting from the
David Schaich (he): in that corresponding box. So this is where the is coming from.
David Schaich (he): I didn't use that same
David Schaich (he): reason we call in between
David Schaich (he): the individual components. Can you like you said in the inner product K, which is the
David Schaich (he): square root of the sum of K x squared plus k y squared.
David Schaich (he): It's just
David Schaich (he): a single dimension that's easy to draw.
David Schaich (he): Oh, no.
David Schaich (he): she the paper, and then the 3 dimensions that they
David Schaich (he): gas is actually
David Schaich (he): living inside. So
David Schaich (he): is that which you in a good position to sorry ahead.
David Schaich (he): I feel pretty sure. How about you?
David Schaich (he): Those answers are
David Schaich (he): also be causing more confusion that they resolved. But for the time being we have now the somewhat simplified expression for the grant theonical potential.
This.
David Schaich (he): yes, of.
David Schaich (he): We have a zoom as part of that simplification that
so it's large compared to what you're playing.
David Schaich (he): so that the you energies and momenta are
David Schaich (he): varying approximately, continuously, you can approximate the sum over those discrete momentum integrals over continuous
David Schaich (he): frequencies restricted to the positive.
David Schaich (he): and that gives us a cast into the form of the frequency of Lego. an integral over all possible frequencies for our photons of
David Schaich (he): I don't make a square times the long
David Schaich (he): that you get from video. I break another cool
David Schaich (he): partition function, the usual. and from what we've learned about the Grand Canonical
David Schaich (he): on some in general.
David Schaich (he): you know that the internal energy, entropy, pressure. and so on. Related to derivatives
David Schaich (he): of this screen canonical potential.
David Schaich (he): The internal energy specifically, is
David Schaich (he): related to the temperature of the
David Schaich (he): of the
David Schaich (he): divided by to with negative signs, plus that chemical potential, You times the expectation for the particle number. We argued that
David Schaich (he): the chemical potential photon, you ask should be. Take it to 0. It's a good approximation which leaves a somewhat simpler expression for the internal energy. In this case. if I
David Schaich (he): change variables from T to the inverse temperature beta that cancels out that negative sign factor of 2 squared. It's just
David Schaich (he): with respect to data of
David Schaich (he): at the times the potential
David Schaich (he): so plugging in the
David Schaich (he): potential for our photon gas. We have
David Schaich (he): that factor of Beta cancelling out factor of T
David Schaich (he): council factors. So V over C. Q. Pi squared
David Schaich (he): with the integral
David Schaich (he): overall frequencies. Omega
David Schaich (he): Everything that depends on
David Schaich (he): the inverse temperature. Beta is in that integral. I forgot to write the wall outside of the
David Schaich (he): so we have the derivative of the check, the beta of the law. one minus exponential factor inside this integral. which
David Schaich (he): is easy enough to compute. You have the derivative of the log, one
David Schaich (he): minus the
David Schaich (he): the numerator.
David Schaich (he): a negative E. This be an age call
the call to
David Schaich (he): negative.
David Schaich (he): so the negative signs cancel out.
David Schaich (he): We can define numerator and denominator by that exponential factor.
David Schaich (he): all that is left in the integral. It's 3. How was of Mega? I'll go into the the the H model. They go
this one.
David Schaich (he): which I said 3. But I look 2
David Schaich (he): in the numerator there. If we consider the energy density you have rather than the energy as a whole.
David Schaich (he): you can right. This
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): H. Bar over. Well.
David Schaich (he): if you write this as an integral over.
David Schaich (he): let's call a spectral density
David Schaich (he): it as a function of
David Schaich (he): Omega. So what this is
David Schaich (he): doing, similar to the way that we have a probability distribution that we are probability density. That means you get a probability.
David Schaich (he): We have introduced a function.
David Schaich (he): the it's a function of the frequency omega
David Schaich (he): that we integrate to
David Schaich (he): get the spectrum or the average energy per unit volume. So the public
David Schaich (he): just stop
David Schaich (he): the normalization factor here, but
mental.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): and this way you're buying things.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): The spectral density
David Schaich (he): of protons is just this quality that we are integrating over
David Schaich (he): how some factor of each part see huge, I square
the
David Schaich (he): I'll make it. you know. Make a queue e to the beta hr Omega minus one. It appears as the arguments of that energy.
David Schaich (he): And this is a
David Schaich (he): famous quality in this function
David Schaich (he): that is known as
David Schaich (he): like spectrum.
David Schaich (he): So spectrum, that's a short hand for spectral density.
David Schaich (he): The Planck spectrum is so named because it was introduced by Max Phone.
David Schaich (he): I don't know what I think. for reasons that we will soon observe on the consider the a higher. No energy limits of this function
David Schaich (he): we can
David Schaich (he): for the purpose of
David Schaich (he): looking at those limits. We can the criminal layer right? The planning spectrum
David Schaich (he): as a function? 3 flags
David Schaich (he): rather than energy.
David Schaich (he): Since you
David Schaich (he): wave length, is
David Schaich (he): it's conjugate variable variable to frequency. So set up a function frequency. We have the flight. Spectrum has a function of
David Schaich (he): we've length.
David Schaich (he): So. looking at the integral that we have here for the energy density.
David Schaich (he): You want to change variables
David Schaich (he): from Omega
David Schaich (he): the frequency to that inverse frequency.
David Schaich (he): So with
David Schaich (he): there we go.
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): inverse of frequency with the calculation of 2 pi.
David Schaich (he): and the integral is going to be a minus
David Schaich (he): 2. I see
square.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): when Omega is 0,
David Schaich (he): you see that corresponds to
David Schaich (he): Lambda
David Schaich (he): and the Integral. Slowly as I make it, goes to infinity, and it goes to 0.
David Schaich (he): The order integration has been swapped. I'll make a queue in the numerator. It is 2 I see over wavelengths to.
David Schaich (he): We have an exponential factor of
David Schaich (he): now 2 Pi
David Schaich (he): C. Over Lambda. the denominator.
David Schaich (he): minus 2, 5, c. Over.
and the square.
David Schaich (he): So, collecting all of these powers of 2 and the like, we have 8 and 16,
David Schaich (he): we have 4 h of time. The numerator, 2 of which it cancel out.
David Schaich (he): Steve, I squared.
David Schaich (he): We have still that same I, curious to one that 4 powers of speed of light. 3 of which cancel out.
David Schaich (he): and and we can reverse the order of integration.
David Schaich (he): a negative sign. good.
David Schaich (he): more familiar, integral from 0 to infinity.
David Schaich (he): Now, out of
David Schaich (he): just D Lambda. cell phone, numerator. we
David Schaich (he): 3 plus 2 is 5. How is it Lambda
David Schaich (he): in the denominator exponential factor minus one?
David Schaich (he): We're in other words, to write this.
David Schaich (he): so it's not so squeezed against the edge of the page.
David Schaich (he): It's like spectrum in terms of wavelength.
David Schaich (he): is 16.
David Schaich (he): I,
David Schaich (he): with 5 h of land, though
David Schaich (he): with that similar exponential factor
David Schaich (he): into the 2
David Schaich (he): minus one. which
David Schaich (he): it looks like this.
David Schaich (he): So plot
David Schaich (he): that grab from
David Schaich (he): that shows
David Schaich (he): they call the spectral ratings what that is. It's just proportional to the it's been divided by
David Schaich (he): I'm: Sorry multiple
David Schaich (he): energy density to hey
David Schaich (he): you that area! What are you calling?
David Schaich (he): We can match? Oh, this these 3 curves for different powers of
David Schaich (he): temperature.
David Schaich (he): So the beta is the inverse temperature. So as the temperature varies, it's going to affect the exponential factor in. and
David Schaich (he): 3 cases of these temperature is 3,000 4,000 5,000Kelvin.
David Schaich (he): It could be same limit in
David Schaich (he): ultimately. that is. shortly once with high energy.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): is.
David Schaich (he): and it goes to
David Schaich (he): 0.
David Schaich (he): In the ultraviolet we have
David Schaich (he): 2 different types of behavior, these 2 different factors, one over
David Schaich (he): that urge polynomially.
David Schaich (he): We also have this complicated expression, one over the exponential. Oh. 2 Pi Hrc. And over that temperature times, Lambda. For a small lambda.
David Schaich (he): The argument of the exponentially gets large. So the exponential itself is exponentially large. and the the group from the exponential.
David Schaich (he): It's going to
David Schaich (he): kill off that. How are the versions?
David Schaich (he): What we expect?
David Schaich (he): The spectrum with the radiance, computer chromos
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): all to 0 exponentially quickly, which is indeed what is here in that limit.
David Schaich (he): the exponential factors dominating over the divergence that we would have without it.
David Schaich (he): If we look at the infrared.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): 4 relatively large wavelengths. Here they are expressed in terms of micrometers. but in general
David Schaich (he): we say that the
David Schaich (he): way of life is large
for the
David Schaich (he): compared to the other factors that are showing up for the argument of the exponential and the pre-factor. So compared to
David Schaich (he): that each part, c. A combination of your conversion factors that it's we can expand that exponential.
David Schaich (he): 2 Pi Hrc. Minus one. We need to turn this one that cancels the next term, they just
David Schaich (he): to over L.
David Schaich (he): We can drop all of the higher phones
David Schaich (he): plugging this expansion into
David Schaich (he): the playing spectrum.
David Schaich (he): We have
David Schaich (he): disappearing in the
David Schaich (he): the pieces.
David Schaich (he): 1, 2,
David Schaich (he): one over one of
David Schaich (he): 200 Hrc. In the denominator.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): 16 over 2 is 8, 1 h pilot.
David Schaich (he): All the Hrc factors cancel as do
David Schaich (he): one of the 5 h to plan it in the numerator. That Beta is the inverse temperature.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): 4 h of the wavelengths are left in the
David Schaich (he): denominator.
David Schaich (he): and this one over one to the fourth expression for yes.
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): what is shown here in the black lines. It's a label of classical theory. So
David Schaich (he): a high temperature over.
Thank you that the fourth
David Schaich (he): we can see that you quantum prediction for the energy density
David Schaich (he): approaches in classical theory in
David Schaich (he): limits of no energies or large wavelengths, which you could also relate to the
David Schaich (he): So before I knew that
David Schaich (he): back in
David Schaich (he): this expression here also
David Schaich (he): holds.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Beta is small
David Schaich (he): work for the just as well. When that is large or even small, they show up
David Schaich (he): one over the other.
David Schaich (he): connects this to
David Schaich (he): limit of high temperatures. Yeah, we looked at in general before the break the regime, what we should expect statistics to reproduce classical
David Schaich (he): predictions. and this 8 pi T. Over advantage of the fourth is indeed
David Schaich (he): possible
David Schaich (he): computation for
David Schaich (he): spectral function of photons
David Schaich (he): without accounting for of the facts.
David Schaich (he): Spectrum
David Schaich (he): was derived on the basis of Cisco physics something 1890. So a few years before
David Schaich (he): his
David Schaich (he): version is your finance of this spectrum. and that refinement is motivated
that we can see here
David Schaich (he): that's just having a single factor of 2 to the fourth means that the and if You' that to me. even if a single phone is going to
David Schaich (he): diverge in the ultraviolet where that we like. Finally, it's small. The energy is, get large.
David Schaich (he): So if we' to use the spectrum to a few things like
David Schaich (he): the energy of the entropy. classically single, particle
David Schaich (he): integrated over all of the energies that it can have that corresponds to integrating over all the wavelengths. Classically, we immediately get affinity from that
David Schaich (he): the prediction that every
energy
David Schaich (he): and it was to
David Schaich (he): share that and produce a spectrum
David Schaich (he): that if you're, it looks more
David Schaich (he): like what we
David Schaich (he): sources of light of the sun
David Schaich (he): that me
David Schaich (he): introduced this exponential factor
David Schaich (he): that reduces to the classical. and you set no
David Schaich (he): but resolved what it's called is ultraviolet
David Schaich (he): catastrophe.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): in the only 19 hundreds. And
David Schaich (he): there's a fun historical story around that. That
David Schaich (he): this is well before quantum physics
David Schaich (he): existed. It was one of the steps along the path to that like basically
David Schaich (he): fudged in this exponential factor as what he called an active desperation. He didn't know where it was coming from. He just saw that it was needed to match experimental observations.
David Schaich (he): and being able to explain, derive thanks, acts of desperation.
Yes.
David Schaich (he): oh. achievements of quantum physics that we have now
David Schaich (he): reproduced in this module, just from all our
David Schaich (he): set up both of the Grand Canonical partition function and the quantum approach to defining micro space. We I've been able to resolve the
David Schaich (he): just to put this on it.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): notes here for future reference, because
David Schaich (he): that's classical spectrum
David Schaich (he): to bridges.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Ultraviolet
David Schaich (he): catastrophe for
David Schaich (he): classical physics
David Schaich (he): that causing statistics. That's all. By reproducing links, active desperation.
David Schaich (he): There are a few other interesting things we can say about this like distribution, for we actually
David Schaich (he): complete the integration. See the energy density itself.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): what would they if for you? Look at this figure we had here without consuming out to see it again. and see that the
David Schaich (he): maximum of the distribution is shifting to different wavelengths as the temperature varies.
David Schaich (he): and in particular
David Schaich (he): for temperatures of
David Schaich (he): of some time the actual temperature of about 5,000 kelvin.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): maximum of
David Schaich (he): it's, like spectral function. is within that range of visible light. We of if you 100 nanometers or
David Schaich (he): point 1, 2,
David Schaich (he): roughly point 4 to point 7.
David Schaich (he): It's an interesting exercise to actually take the derivative of the spectrum that computes the position of that maximum as a function of temperature. For now we can just
David Schaich (he): you can tend to
David Schaich (he): look at this data.
David Schaich (he): Connected to the interpretation
David Schaich (he): is the observation that this is not a coincidence. The
David Schaich (he): visible spectrum of wavelengths
David Schaich (he): is actually visible.
David Schaich (he): because
David Schaich (he): the something that reaches us as a gas of photons
David Schaich (he): has a temperature of around
David Schaich (he): 5,000 Kelvin be specific
David Schaich (he): value is 5,800, Helen. and
David Schaich (he): the way that
David Schaich (he): we can determine the temperature of the sunlight that's reaching us through the
David Schaich (he): the effective surface temperature of
David Schaich (he): the so the reasonable assumption that the energies of photons are not too much affected by the
David Schaich (he): purity through empty space, from the sun to the earth.
David Schaich (he): You get that by
David Schaich (he): measuring the spectrum of
David Schaich (he): energy is from the sun. So the spectrum of solar radiation is all
David Schaich (he): on this figure.
David Schaich (he): So this is something that we can look up at the song and measure
using these
David Schaich (he): technology that was developed in the
David Schaich (he): how it.
David Schaich (he): how much. however.
David Schaich (he): or energy from some that we get
David Schaich (he): that visible
David Schaich (he): range of lights. we said before.
about 400 to 700
David Schaich (he): manual users.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): if we measure the
David Schaich (he): amount of energy power in that sunlight as a function of frequency. Pretty good. Well, the 2 curves here, one yellow, one red and yellow
David Schaich (he): data, is what reaches the top of the earth's atmosphere.
David Schaich (he): So traveling from the sun to the earth without too much
David Schaich (he): interference from the empty space in between
David Schaich (he): the red is what is left over what makes it through the atmosphere to reach us at ground level.
David Schaich (he): So some of the sunlight that
David Schaich (he): it's the atmosphere. This is zoomed as it comes down
David Schaich (he): from the top of the first atmosphere to a sea level
David Schaich (he): in this case. So if we focus on some that reaches us more directly from this.
David Schaich (he): You can fit that to the plank spectrum.
David Schaich (he): This call here a our black body functional form.
David Schaich (he): This is the black curve here
David Schaich (he): that produces a
David Schaich (he): reasonable
David Schaich (he): description of the observational data recalling that we have made the assumption that I will
David Schaich (he): completely non-interacting. It's an ideal gas of photons.
David Schaich (he): So there is some discrepancy around the future visible life, and the higher people see
David Schaich (he): tail of the ultraviolet. We'll just sell back body fish.
David Schaich (he): But in general
David Schaich (he): this is especially
David Schaich (he): absorption phone.
David Schaich (he): Let me see excellent description of the data by like spectrum P of the data to that functional form
David Schaich (he): basically predicts the temperature of the sunlight that it's reaching us.
You can see
David Schaich (he): the greatest it
David Schaich (he): at sea level in that visible
David Schaich (he): range
David Schaich (he): makes sense. If we consider that
David Schaich (he): our eyes have evolved to the actual use
David Schaich (he): I for you
David Schaich (he): folks on the stats and you have available for this number of photons are coming in
David Schaich (he): at the visible wave.
David Schaich (he): They are visible evolutionarily.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. The black body terminology.
David Schaich (he): I should explain so
David Schaich (he): a big historical. It's what people were talking about in the late 18 hundreds and early 19 touchers. The idea is but driving these
David Schaich (he): spectrum, or the
David Schaich (he): like spectrum.
David Schaich (he): and all of the others working with them at the time we're considering the
David Schaich (he): one that was being admitted
David Schaich (he): from some object at a given temperature.
David Schaich (he): and in particular they wanted to
David Schaich (he): think about the light being emitted in complete isolation, and now have to worry about
David Schaich (he): like being reflected of that object as well.
David Schaich (he): So we know that.
David Schaich (he): Oh.
David Schaich (he): the common white corresponds to all of the
David Schaich (he): what do you think of? Is it like being reflected by an object various different colors?
David Schaich (he): It's not a part of it. Those photons
David Schaich (he): a black body is one that perfectly absorbs all of the life that shines on it.
David Schaich (he): so none of it is reflected. and none of it would contaminate the
David Schaich (he): spectrum of
David Schaich (he): light that is being emitted by that object. At that temperature the admitted life would be considered in isolation
David Schaich (he): without having to worry about reflected light. If we have that perfectly black object or a black body.
David Schaich (he): So that is just the explanation for that. and about the terminology that you may well see
David Schaich (he): Pop up. So
David Schaich (he): from the source of fits, we can determine the effective surface temperature of the sun. That's actually how it's done. We don't Well, I thermometers up to the sun. What i'll be doing now
for determining
David Schaich (he): the temperature of the sun that could be determined a century ago, just based on the like spectrum.
David Schaich (he): We can even do that same procedure for distance stars. We get enough light
David Schaich (he): that we have
David Schaich (he): develop sensitive enough technology
David Schaich (he): lightly received from distance. Stars can be measured in the same way as a function of wavelength.
David Schaich (he): It can be 6 to the my spectrum we can measure the
David Schaich (he): for sure of those stars
David Schaich (he): which varies
David Schaich (he): so in the order of magnitude of the
David Schaich (he): they are calling. What are called red stars have relatively
David Schaich (he): no temperatures.
David Schaich (he): so they
David Schaich (he): that's all.
David Schaich (he): Low temperature corresponds to a little energy toward that infrared
David Schaich (he): regime, or the red side of the physical spectrum.
David Schaich (he): 3,500 kelvin or less based on fittings on the spectrum.
David Schaich (he): You know our blue stars that you have
David Schaich (he): higher temperatures.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
rough scale is about 10,000, Kelvin.
David Schaich (he): and we can even measure the temperature of intergalactic space from
David Schaich (he): this approach they should be energy. Your phone is a function of frequency fits in the plank spectrum.
David Schaich (he): We get a temperature
David Schaich (he): approximately 2.7 kelvin.
David Schaich (he): which is
you
David Schaich (he): extremely interesting physics topic, and also an important one.
David Schaich (he): We do have enough time to talk about for a few minutes
David Schaich (he): when we look at photons that seem to be coming for intergalactic space.
David Schaich (he): What that really is is
David Schaich (he): the remnants of the Big Bang that he
David Schaich (he): 14 billionyears ago, in the real numbers it's given the
David Schaich (he): recall, the
David Schaich (he): cosmic microwave background.
David Schaich (he): So Photon set
David Schaich (he): left over from the Big Bang just reaching us
David Schaich (he): 14 billionyears
David Schaich (he): later. Anyone that
David Schaich (he): this
David Schaich (he): image here can see that to fit in again
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): a something you might have seen before in this visualization of the temperature.
David Schaich (he): All that also is microwave background.
David Schaich (he): So what's going on
David Schaich (he): here is that we are looking up at the sky and projecting that onto
David Schaich (he): this angular oval just the same way that you can project the earth onto.
David Schaich (he): and the lips of this shape and that we're looking down at the surface of your space. This is going the other direction.
David Schaich (he): looking at the sky and the service of the earth. unwrapping it into
David Schaich (he): even that spherical shell and rolling it out.
David Schaich (he): use a paper.
David Schaich (he): So the
David Schaich (he): different colors here are indicated in the temperature of the photons that are coming from
David Schaich (he): that particular point in this in the sky.
David Schaich (he): See
David Schaich (he): onto the screen.
Good for sure
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): from those photons that are left after accounting for
David Schaich (he): all. Close by sources of light, like stars.
David Schaich (he): galaxies. those so called foregrounds.
David Schaich (he): all it is masked out of the data. There's attractive
David Schaich (he): photons and our left have a characteristic
David Schaich (he): range of energy as a function of frequency
David Schaich (he): that get fit to
David Schaich (he): It's like spectrum. You determine the temperature.
David Schaich (he): and they can distract me.
David Schaich (he): Blue and red colors indicates small fluctuations
David Schaich (he): around the average temperature.
David Schaich (he): Oh. you see at the for sure.
David Schaich (he): at temperature it's 2.7 kelvin round numbers.
David Schaich (he): my small. with the difference in temperature between the
David Schaich (he): new regions that are cold and the red regions that are hot
David Schaich (he): in this data is roughly to.
David Schaich (he): So about 10,000 times smaller than the average, is the scale of the fluctuations that
David Schaich (he): you are able to resolve
David Schaich (he): in this case by the like satellite that is
David Schaich (he): orbiting the earth.
David Schaich (he): If you need to measure
David Schaich (he): in turn these fluctuations more precisely.
David Schaich (he): that is of interest, because that the pattern of fluctuations, how the hot and cool areas are
David Schaich (he): spread out and mix together in that night sky.
David Schaich (he): He is
David Schaich (he): one of the
David Schaich (he): many pieces of evidence that we have for
David Schaich (he): the existing properties of what's called
David Schaich (he): so some source of matter in the universe that does not consist of
David Schaich (he): animals. That's a. We are made out of.
David Schaich (he): compose everything but
studying and interact with on a daily basis.
David Schaich (he): And just as a final illustrator, so like that, I think this particular
David Schaich (he): temperature distribution of the cost and background is from around 2,015.
David Schaich (he): So it's just a few years old. The The cosmic background explorer ran. It was an experiment.
this particular figure
David Schaich (he): it could be experiments
David Schaich (he): so slightly older than you are. and it shows
David Schaich (he): Hi this.
I'm calling you the data
David Schaich (he): and the fitting that
David Schaich (he): is carried out. So this is
David Schaich (he): energy density
David Schaich (he): in particular units, and the function of a frequency in municipal
David Schaich (he): hundreds of jiggers.
David Schaich (he): so that
David Schaich (he): 300 gigahertz is
David Schaich (he): roughly
David Schaich (he): so. The peak in this spectrum here. So the date, the black boxes are
David Schaich (he): the data points that this currently is measure that more than 30 years ago. It's peak around a frequency
David Schaich (he): 150
David Schaich (he): jigger Hertz corresponds to.
David Schaich (he): and the overseas time set frequency. It's 2 angular frequency to circular frequency. c. Is 3, 5 to the eighth meters per second
David Schaich (he): frequency. Here is the the eleventh inverse seconds.
David Schaich (he): Seconds cancel the my excuse. and the 8 over 10. The 11 is 10 to the minus 3. It's a factor of
David Schaich (he): 3. Over 1.5 is 2
David Schaich (he): millimeters.
David Schaich (he): which is roughly a 1,000 to 3 orders of magnitude, larger way of then that visible spectrum
David Schaich (he): in particular. This corresponds in the Categorization
David Schaich (he): Hotel frequencies 2 that microwave
David Schaich (he): 3 meters.
David Schaich (he): which is why it's called Yes, cosmic microwave background
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): that was able to measure
David Schaich (he): from fitting the lifeline to the
David Schaich (he): data points shown by boxes was.
David Schaich (he): it's seen, 2.7,
David Schaich (he): 3, 5, and certainty. 60 of the last 2 decimal places
David Schaich (he): that has been improved similarly in the past 30 years. as okay appreciate by being able to resolve
David Schaich (he): fluctuations at the level. So a couple of orders of magnitude
David Schaich (he): more precise than the uncertainty, so
David Schaich (he): came out in the 1990 S.
David Schaich (he): But this, as the first very precise
David Schaich (he): measurements of the temperature of intergalactic space. The
David Schaich (he): left over cosmic background radiation
David Schaich (he): of the big bag did receive the mobile price in 2,006
David Schaich (he): for the first, if not the the final word
David Schaich (he): on it
David Schaich (he): Analyses of empty space based on
David Schaich (he): the play spectrum or a photon gas.
David Schaich (he): Take away message from this figure, which I think I highlighted. This first of the class is that we are getting
David Schaich (he): the amazingly accurate
David Schaich (he): descriptions of
David Schaich (he): physical processes from we call this regions of empty space to how the star is in the Us.
David Schaich (he): To be amazing aspect of the accuracy. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): is due to the fact that we should keep in mind.
David Schaich (he): It's an economical partition function. We have it's starting with through these boson signs. Distribution
David Schaich (he): did begin by assuming we're working with non interactive
David Schaich (he): ideal particles which it's not true. and the real world but still provides me an excellent description of
David Schaich (he): observed data, at least, for
David Schaich (he): i'll stop there.
David Schaich (he): The final call for questions, and just look ahead to It's coming up tomorrow
David Schaich (he): pretty quickly. Compute the equation of states from the photon gas and then turn to fermions. There we go.
David Schaich (he): build into a build up to some of that tutorial or modeling electron
David Schaich (he): and see some of the
David Schaich (he): the behavior or good descriptions of
David Schaich (he): real experimental data based on. I realized statistical physics. the grand economic and ensemble and call them statistics any final questions. Before
David Schaich (he): there we go All of the day
David Schaich (he): that case I will stop that recording down.